# Getting_and_Cleaning_data - Programming assignment

This is the README.md for the Programming Assignment of the Coursera Course "Getting and Cleaning Data"

This repository hosts:  
 * the R code **"run_analysis.R"**, which actually performs the analysis of the data and writes the output file
 * the output file **"tidy.txt"** itself with the averaged 80 variables observed for 180 Subject/activity pairs
 * a general **"README.md"**, which describes the purpose of this assignment, the used data set, the scripts   
   and files created and also briefly the   contents stored in the repo.
 * a **"Codebook.md"** file, that describes the functionality and variables of the "run_analysis.R" script and its   
   generated output file.

## General description of the data set and requested tasks
The used data set is: [Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones)

One of the most exciting areas in all of data science right now is wearable computing. Companies like Fitbit, Nike, and Jawbone Up are racing to develop the most advanced algorithms to attract new users. The used data set represent data collected from the accelerometers from the Samsung Galaxy S smartphone. A full description is available at the site where the data was obtained. 

For this assigment we should create a script that does the following:

        1. Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.
        2. Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement.
        3. Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set
        4. Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names.
        5. From the data set in step 4, creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average   
           of each variable for each activity and each subject.


## Scripts and files
The script generated for this assignment is the "run_analysis.R" script. Here is a general description of the generated script, the output file and the complementary .md files. More information about script and variables can be found in the "Codebook.md" file.

* **run_analysis.R** - This script performs the following steps:
       	
	1. Downloads and unzips the UCI HAR dataset, if the data set is not yet existing in the current working directory
	2. Reads in "features.txt" and "activity_labels.txt", which contain informations on kind of measurement (variables) and activity. With these informations data columns can be named with its appropriate variable name and activity labels can be transformed into descriptive names.
	3. Extracts variable names of all measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement. With those names the proper columns can be selected out of the data set.
	4. Transforms the selected variable names to proper descriptive variable names for labeling the data set.
	5. Merges the training and testing data set by first loading both data sets, extracting the needed columns in both data sets and merges both adapted sets with adding the descriptive column labels prepared in step iv.
	6. Calculates the average of the selected columns for each Subject/Activity pair
	7. Writes the output in a file "tidy.txt".    
	
	
* **tidy.txt**  
The output file is generated by the run_analysis.R script. It is a tidy data set, which shows the average of each variable for each Subject/Activity pair. Each row represents one Subject/Activity pair and each column shows the average of all observations of a certain variable. The task within this assignment was to select only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement. This was done in above described step v. (using labels extracted in step iii) by selecting the respective variable columns from the input files ("X_train.txt" and "X_test.txt" which contain the preprocessed measurements).  
The output data set looks like this:

    `Subject Activity           tBodyAcc_Mean_X   tBodyAcc_Mean_Y      tBodyAcc_Mean_Z      `  
    `1       WALKING            0.277330758736842 -0.0173838185273684  -0.111148103547368   `    
    `1       WALKING_UPSTAIRS   0.255461689622641 -0.0239531492643396  -0.0973020020943396  `  
    `1       WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS 0.289188320408163 -0.00991850461020408 -0.107566190908163   `  


* **README.md**
This is the README.md file, which describes the general task of this assignment with the used scripts and generated output and complementary files in the repo. 

* **Codebook.md**
The added Codebook.md file is meant for explaining all used variables, the data with units and other relevant information about the data set and the performed transformations.